---
layout: post
title: Explaining the Point Reactor Kinetics Equations
comments: true
category: posts
---

The point reactor kinetics equations are used in neutronic transient analyses 
when a fast, simple estimate of transient behavior is needed. However, not all 
nuclear engineers will ever take nuclear reactor dynamics. To describe the
meaning of "point" in the PRKE to a graduate student collaborator today, I gave
the following explanation in words (no equations).

# PRKE (without the math)

The point reactor kinetics equations assume a nueutron flux shape through the
reactor. In this way, the dimensionality of the problem is reduced to a
"point". However, that point is not "the middle of the fuel pebble." It is not
anywhere, geometrically. The point simply refers to the magnitude of that
assumed flux shape, (and therefore the magnitude of the reactor power).

The many partial differential equations that result can most simply and loosely
be solved in two blocks. There is the neutronics block, which assumes a point
reactor, as I have just discussed. There is also the thermal hydraulics block
which you are helping with. The neutronics block determines the power based on
the reactivity in the reactor. 

The reactivity calculation, however, relies on the temperature of each
component. So, the thermal hydraulics block must calculate the those
temperatures based on the most recent calculation of the power. The thermal
hydraulics calculation can be conducted to any detail that is desired, however,
the power distribution is not specified, so the standard way is to do it with a
0-D model like the lumped capacitance model (in which each component is treated
as a lump.) The neutronics block in the point reactor kinetics equations solves
for the total reactor power, so, in the thermal model, that power should be
evenly distributed everywhere there is fuel. That is, it should be treated as
if it is in the "fuel" lump of the lumped capacitance model. 

