---
layout: post
title: Women Only Events
comments: true
category: posts
---

Though I'd been a participant in female-focused events in the past, I had never 
helped to make one happen until this month.  In the last few weeks, I helped to 
organize two women-focused events in scientific computing.  My experiences as an 
organizer of these events brought up a few thoughts for me. Foremost, I was 
reminded that women are excellent. Also, though, it raised concerns for me about 
the effects of gendered isolation, the need for supportive non-female allies, 
and remaining change needed in STEM culture.

# Three Weeks, Two Events, Hundreds of Women 

The first of these events was a [Software 
Carpentry](http://software-carpentry.org/ "Software Carpentry") bootcamp for 
Women in Science and Engineering. For that bootcamp, I was the lead instructor, 
and my summary of that event can be [found at the Berkeley Science 
Review](http://sciencereview.berkeley.edu/wise-athena-swifter-hermes/ "WiSE 
Summary"). The second event was a Women In Tech data science tutorial for female 
Bay Area high schoolers. It took place in conjunction with the [Silicon Valley 
PyData conference](http://pydata.org/sv2014 "PyData") and was led by the 
unstoppable [Cindee Madison](https://twitter.com/rgrrl "Cindee on Twitter").  

## Isolation

Sometimes, you want to hold an event at a conference that is intended just for 
women. It's tempting to hold it in parallel with the conference, but the result is 
often that the actual conference is left bereft of women. This happened last 
year at [SciPy2013](http://conference.scipy.org/scipy2013/ "SciPy2013") when we 
held the ladies mixer at the same time as the full conference mixer. The result 
was the women felt left out of a large part of the social aspects of the SciPy 
conference. It also happened somewhat last weekend at the WIT event. While the 
WIT event drew many women who otherwise might not have attended PyData at all 
(myself included), we were certainly isolated from the rest of the conference 
for most of that day. 

At [SciPy2014](http://conference.scipy.org/scipy2014/ "SciPy2014") (this year), 
we're going to hold the women's event over lunch, when there aren't any other 
official social events going on. 

## Supportive Allies

Just as the queer community benefits from heterosexual allies, so too, women and 
women's events benefit greatly from non-female allies. These allies might be 
volunteer helpers (as in the WiSE bootcamp), helpful venue employees running the 
A/V (as in the WIT event), or supportive discussants (as in the mixer at 
SciPy2013). Allies come in other forms as well. Often, they're community 
leaders. For Software Carpentry, we have an all-star supporter in [Greg 
Wilson](http://third-bit.com/ "Greg"). 
In the WIT event, we had [Travis 
Oliphant](http://technicaldiscovery.blogspot.com/ "Travis"), who dropped by just to smile in the 
background and quietly observe what NumFocus had supported.

When women are only a small fraction of a community (as is the case in STEM) our 
allies from a better-represented demographic are essential for boosting our 
signal, but are too often forgotten. I'm looking forward to the SciPy 2014 
ladies lunch, which may have a number of supportive ally attendees. 


## Culture

The most important thing that was solidified for me in these events was the 
importance of culture. Apropos 'leaning in' and 'whistling Vivaldi,' the culture 
of a learning or working environment is so pervasive it can be simultaneously 
indetectible and debilitating.  It was jolting to notice in these events that a 
room full of women is vastly different from the culture I breathe day-to-day. As 
we are chronically exposed to the effects of our gendered culture, we somtimes 
forget their power. A few hours not feeling the weight of my 'otherness' 
reminded me of the immense mass of the culture that still needs to be shifted.
